How the bond market is going to respond will depend on the circumstances that caused such an abrupt change and what that does to the expectations and how long it persists.
 A statistical test that we have run on the median CPI, a core measure that we developed at our Bank, indicates that the inflation trend has not changed at all during the expansion. Similar analyses that we've run on the core PCE lead us to the same conclusion. Once we've added in the Greenbook projection for PCE, there will have been no improvement in the inflation trend during the entire expansion period. So, I find it difficult to contemplate looking at a projection for core PCE that entails reverting to the inflation levels that we had in 1994 and 1995 without at least expressing some concern that the balance of risks is toward more inflation than is really acceptable. Thank you, Mr.
 It seems to me that what we have is a relatively tight labor market among the trained in certain geographical locations combined with nightmare situations of severe unemployment in other geographical locations and other sectors of the society so that, in the aggregate, we=re seeing [the situation] as being worse than [it is] from an economic point of view. As a consequence, I think those people who are employed and are consuming probably have a greater degree of confidence than we are giving them credit for having, despite the increasing levels of debt. So I would say net on that score that we will probably see a continued expansion. I do think the issue of inflation, and particularly the dollar, should begin to have an impact on capital spending in this country, and for that reason I don=t think we=re likely to be surprised by an expansion in that sector. We would all like to be surprised, I suspect, but I don=t think we=re likely to see it.
 We have to expect that. That was bound to happen whenever the economic data became clearly positive. It seems remarkable to me that with the dispensing of the rebate program, we've gone from fears of too much stimulus to fears based on the yet unannounced energy program, which clearly will have some significant impact, depending on its reception and development in the Congress. I often have taken the position of staying in place. I think clearly it is appropriate for us to continue reducing our targets or our ranges.
 In any event, let me turn for a minute to an adjunct on this exchange rate discussion and read to you three points that Ted Truman is recommending relative to our discussions about exchange rates. It comes basically out of the experience that we've observed first with Secretary Bentsen, then the President, and then Secretary Brown. Item one: Exchange rates are like interest rates, and if a central banker discusses one, the central banker will be understood to be discussing the other. The best comment for the Federal Reserve is "no comment." [Item two:] We are going through a delicate period in terms of exchange rates and, any talk, no matter how analytical, is likely to take on exaggerated importance.
 be some more foreclosures, particularly as rates adjust up this year. So I presume that prices will need to drop somewhat, rather than just stay level as in the staff forecast, even to get the housing stabilization and eventual slight rebound that the staff and I included in our real GDP forecast. Now, to offset the effects of weakness in wealth from these prices, I had a slight easing of monetary policy this year, next year, and the following year--1/4 percentage point each year--to get that same output. This was only a slight easing in real rates given that inflation is edging down and inflation expectations aren't presumed to change very much.
 That said, I think that for a medium-term forecast going out beyond this period--and leaving aside the little run-ups that we have had--we might be more inclined to shift from an almost flat nominal price trend, which implies a real price decline, to something that might be more flat in real terms. While there is no inviolable arithmetic involved here, I think almost everybody believes that we have to get there ultimately. That's because of a sense that some of the technological improvements that have come on line and other factors will come into play to produce that result. Now, I say all that partly against the background of an assumption that Iraq will stay put. If we assume that Iraq will reenter the market with 3 million barrels a day or something like that, then we are postponing that scenario for 18 months or a couple of years before the extra supply is absorbed.
 I think it's more than likely that we will face that kind of question again this time. Now, whether we choose "A" or "B" biases things a bit, but I don't think we ought to be overwhelmed by that particular difference. If I had to guess--and I suppose it's implicit in my remarks here on worrying about what's going to happen--I'd say the danger is that the money supply is going to be too big and the economy is going to be a little stronger. The growth in money is going to be too big regardless of which of those targets we pick or if we choose something in between. Now, we still have to make a judgment about what we are going to do and reach some kind of consensus.
 respond. I know everyone has his or her own view about that, and I appreciate that. But anybody who says he has a clue about how the market will react is in my judgment expressing a lack of knowledge. As far as I'm concerned, the policy issue today is straightforward. I think there's no issue with respect to the appropriate policy.
Yes, that happens often. [I feel fairly comfortable] predicting what is going to occur--that there will be strength sometime in the fall. But in which particular month is almost impossible to tell.
 But don't let me interrupt. I think your point is that concern in the business community seems to be growing over time. Earlier on, there was a sense of uncertainty in some sectors; but now I believe there is a greater realization that the tax reform is going to affect the business sector at large--assuming that it comes out something like this Senate plan.
What I meant, Mr. Chairman, is that unless told differently we would construct a nonborrowed path based on the required reserves that are evident that week, assuming that borrowing will satisfy $200 million of the total of excess and required. And that's how it will be constructed until we're told differently.
 find that a large number of companies are doing very well and that would not be the case were we experiencing a minus 5 percent rate of decline in activity. The widespread anecdotal reports that I am exposed to do not contain very many straws suggestive of an upturn, but that is the way the economy looks at a cyclical bottom. In fact, if we go back and look at previous bottoms, we will find people saying exactly what I have just said. Indeed, a necessary condition for a bottom is the exhaustion of negative psychology that sets the stage for an upturn in optimism. I believe we will eventually get the projected upturn.
 Regarding the last sentence, I think the phrase that it is important to retain is "considerable period." The phrase that I think is going to get a lot of attention is "to foster the containing of. " It will likely be the focus of attention just because it is awkward. It would be less awkward if we dropped the participle and just said "to contain disinflationary forces." But to do so would be to promise more than monetary policy can probably deliver.
 in fact generate those kinds of rates. So, as I look at it, I think the inflation forecast that the Board staff has is probably still on the low side. I also agree with Frank, for slightly different reasons, that the chances are that real growth in '78 will be still somewhat higher than we really would like to have, given where we are. We are a little more optimistic on housing than the staff is, reflecting primarily [our view that] the thrifts will get more money than the Board staff thinks. On consumer spending, I think the Board staff is right.
 I want to comment a little further on each of these two points. First, with regard to a slowdown toward trend, I expect the economy grew at a rate of about 4 to 4-1/2 percent in the second quarter. If the staff forecast is correct and if mine is correct, this will be the only quarter during the year when growth is significantly above trend, and it will follow a year when growth was decidedly below trend. I think Governor Kelley did a very excellent job of putting that in historical perspective by looking at four-quarter growth rates. That would produce growth for the year of about 2.
 I don't think we can get away with it. I was a little concerned, actually, about what I sensed as a primary emphasis on M-1A in the Bluebook this time whereas [previously] we have talked about M-1B. I don't think we can switch the tiller, or whatever we are using as the directing mechanism, at will and not confuse this Committee as well as the financial markets generally.
9 or 3 percent. I don't say that with a great deal of confidence but that's where my bias seems to be. For one thing, I'm not entirely sure what the full effect will be of the ease that we've undertaken recently. I don't think we've seen the full effect of that. I think we're seeing some positive effects, but I'd be a bit cautious in terms of trying to do a whole lot more at this time until we can assess that a little better.
If we think it will be.
 continue to decrease. What we do know is that core inflation has been above 2 percent for two and a half years and is expected to be there, according to the forecast, for another two years. Put another way, there is little evidence in the forecast that policy actions to date will bring core inflation back below 2 percent before sometime in 2009. I think that should concern us. I see two inflation scenarios as being plausible, and I struggle with which one I believe to be the correct one.
 I have in mind not only the narrowing of credit spreads and the dramatic decline in the premiums for credit derivative default swaps but the very significant drop in the level of interest rates on BBB and even higher-yield obligations. The fall in those rates has reduced the cost of capital to a substantial part of the business community, which for a considerable period of time had been blocked out of the lending market by rates that were close to prohibitive for lower-rated borrowers. To be sure, a decline in the cost of capital does not necessarily mean that capital investment will pick up. Such investment depends on the extent to which business executives see real investment opportunities. And in line with what Jack Guynn was mentioning, I suspect that people who are beginning to say in private that they feel a bit optimistic nonetheless are not inclined to voice their convictions in public because optimism is not at this point the conventional wisdom.
 remain moderate. If we relax any of these assumptions, the risks are tilted toward higher inflation and more rapid output growth. When we consider the results of the special Beige Book survey on capital investment plans, which confirmed that many companies are planning to increase their spending because of strong demand and emerging capacity constraints, the question arises of whether the capacity will come on line in time to relieve the inflationary pressures that have emerged in the last year. It seems that too many assumptions must work out just right to get the low inflation envisioned in the Greenbook. As I said earlier, prior to yesterday I had only participated in two FOMC meetings.
 Moreover, even if we redefined the Greenbook-consistent measure of r* to use lagged headline inflation, the implied 0.6 percentage point gap between the actual and the estimated equilibrium real rates would not necessarily imply that you should quickly raise the nominal funds rate by more than 1/2 percentage point. If, like the staff, you think it likely that headline inflation will moderate substantially later this year, then it follows that a gradual firming of policy in nominal terms would be consistent with a substantial rise in the real funds rate on this measure over time. Indeed, in the staff's view, the average value of the real federal funds rate over the next few years on any measure is a bit above the corresponding value of r*, and consequently the trajectory of the real funds rate on any measure would be consistent with protracted slack and declining inflation over the next several years. Of course, you may not agree with the staff about underlying trends for prices and real activity and, hence, about the value of r*.
 Michael Moskow mentioned something along these lines as well. McDonnell Douglas ended the strike with their machinists union during the intermeeting period. In the agreement, union workers will receive a 4 percent lump sum bonus this year on top of their normal cost of living increase plus a 2-1/2 percent wage increase next May. In addition, retirement benefits were increased more than 24 percent, from $33 to $41 dollars for each year of credited service. All told, this settlement represents a substantial increase in worker compensation.
 Our sense is that a lot of firms have not yet really settled their plans on how much they are going to stockpile. They are still in contact with their suppliers, trying to get assurances that there won't be problems and trying to assess where the risks may be. We anticipate that they will firm up those decisions over the next few months and, therefore, that most of the inventory building will occur in the latter months of this year. That is when the production effects will probably show up for the most part.
 I've been very surprised and extraordinarily pleased with our ability over the past several years to get acceptance of the notion that price stability is a necessary condition for maximum sustainable economic growth. This is not the way the Congress thinks; this is not the way the media think. I don't think this is the way the Congress and the media are going to think in the future. I'm quite fearful, as a number of you have been, about raising an issue here which is latent. So long as we've kept it somewhat academic and not threatening, I think it has turned out to be all right.
 So I, for one, believe I would like to join the 4-3-2-1 club. That is to say: How in the world can any of us be policymakers and not want to get the rate of inflation, as Lee Hoskins says, down to a zero rate? If we are going to get it down, we really have to begin. And it seems to me that 5 percent doesn't do it; it needs to go the other way. My preference would be to start with four percent on the CPI in 1987, be down in the 3 percent range in 1988, and proceed lower [thereafter].
 But I also believe that that's going to have to be played out on a day-by-day basis. It's a little hard to know how that's going to go. I think that you and the Committee can and will adequately take that into account as events unfold. Meanwhile, I think the potential for weakness in the economy and the consequences of it--if we get it and it gets away from us--are severe. I may be a cockeyed optimist but I think there's a possibility that we will continue to get better inflation results than expected.
I have one question on M2. I presume, Steve, that in setting your compatible ranges for M2 for 1980, you're assuming that short-term rates will not get down low enough to produce any great reflow of funds into the thrifts?
 I would like to put out numbers on inflation goals that we intend to achieve. However, as we have seen in these discussions before, if the number is to be 3 percent inflation for 1998, I don't want to publish it. I have a real problem with agreeing to publish a number if it is one that is going to reflect somebody's best guess as to what the dynamics of this Committee and interactions from some models will produce rather than a clear and attainable goal for reducing inflation. My second problem, though not a new one, is the framework. If we supply a number for inflation, my own number would be 2 percent for 1998, and then the staff puts together a matrix that indicates how many people would have to be thrown out of work and how much output would have to be sacrificed to get to 2 percent inflation in that year, I am not going to want to publish that either.
 If we try to fix it at this stage, because of presumptions about an inflationary bias of Fed actions, it really becomes very difficult to do that and maintain credibility. I agree with what you said before. At some point, we are going to reach a very difficult juncture, and we will have to make some tough judgments. But I think we are far from that point right now.
 There is, I think, a change in attitude developing that is worth noting. Looking at the national level going forward, we judge that the continued accommodative stance of monetary policy and some of the easing of headwinds created by energy prices should now contribute to a healthy pace of economic growth in 2005 and 2006. Specifically, it appears as though growth will remain above trend, in the 31/2 to 4 percent range, as others have noted. While I do not want to make too much of one data release, I agree with the point others have made that the payroll numbers do provide some evidence of a significantly more positive forecast than we might otherwise have been thinking about. I would also note that, with this kind of growth continuing, there are some indications that prices could move up maybe a tenth or two in the first part of next year.
 Now, I do agree that labor costs have not been cited as a problem for inflationary pressures, and so that does add somewhat to trimming out the risks there. Inflation expectations were also an issue. No matter how often we say that core inflation is a more reliable measure of underlying inflationary tendencies, I find it difficult to believe that the public's inflationary expectations will not be affected by large and persistent increases in food and energy prices. The past five years have been unkind on this score. On average over this time, higher food and energy prices have pushed total inflation above core about 1/2 percentage point, and it is also sizable over the past ten years.
 be able to distinguish between a growth rate that is slowing from 2 percent to nothing versus slowing from 3 percent plus down to 2 percent or a bit less. So, if we do not move now, I think people will be even more convinced that we will not take action under circumstances of slowing growth. We may therefore find ourselves more paralyzed at the next meeting, and that could cause us some problems that will be very difficult to deal with.
 Chairman, I too think that 1985 is going to be a critical period, and I think it is important that we give the markets some qualitative description of our intentions for 1985. That means that 1984 targeting is going to be all the more important because of the carryover from that year into 1985. But I hope, as I think Governor Martin was just saying, that we will resist any Congressional or other pressures to quantify the targets for 1985. Our strategy for both years should be, as has been stated before, an objective of having a steady and gradual reduction of the rate of money growth over time. The long-term plan, it seems to me, is to keep inflation in check and to achieve price stability in the long run, and that objective is equally applicable to 1985 as to 1984.
 Chairman, I'd like to repeat something I said earlier. I don't think it matters a great deal here in terms of either "A" or "B." When we talk about all the dangers and risks that are out there, what still bothers me is that the biggest danger is that if we get another month or two of money growth rates like the ones we've had over the past three or four months, then all those dangers we're talking about are going to materialize anyway. We're going to have higher interest rates. Indeed, I think we'll have the instabilities of interest rates that you spoke of.
 We've been trying to get the M2 range to price stability, and we finally got it here. It may be true that M2 isn't working, but the range is working! [Laughter] And if M2 comes back, we actually will not be pressured to move on it. Anyway, that was supposed to be a question!
 On the other side, we know that the shock effect [from] October 6 caused construction--in terms of new starts--to turn off completely. That doesn't show up for three months in terms of the set up. In contrast to that, of course, is the fact that leasing is just going crazy now because of projected shortages: I wonder how much of that will be reversed if availability is not [a problem]. So availability versus price and its impact may give us a different path than we would get from a normal cyclical type of analysis.
 Whether it's right or not, we don't really know. But I think there are lots of reasons to be optimistic about that. If that view is correct, I think it's logical to expect that the demand for the technological equipment that is necessary for achieving productivity gains is going to have to resume. That demand is going to resume because otherwise we're not going to get the productivity that is implied by this outlook for the economy. There was over-expansion in that industry and there are some backlogs to be worked off.
 Chairman. I strongly support your recommendation for a 50 basis point increase and for a balance of risks sentence tilted toward higher inflation. I recognize that there is some uncertainty about how far we will need to go and I personally think we are going to have to do more.
Well, to the eye, it's a better seasonal pure and simple. I think there is an inherent flaw in the method we use now in that it never catches up to reality. I will present [the experimental seasonal] in an appendix to the testimony, anyway. If we didn't have the problem that people would think we were pulling a fast one, we'd change to that seasonal right now because it does look better in terms of this repetitive pattern we have involving the first and second months of a quarter. But it bears upon July because that new seasonal would show a smaller increase in July.
 By the way, I found the core revisions somewhat alarming because they're well above 2 percent, but less alarming than what I think I heard you say about headline inflation projections. If my memory is correct, over the past two years there has been a wider spread between core and headline, and part of that has been due to the ability of firms at least to restrain or not to exploit any perceived pricing power. If you're assuming that core will be relatively well behaved over time, some assumptions must be in there about margins and margin management, and I wonder what they are. Then I have a question for Steve on the international side to follow up on that.
 So in effect their cost of capital is zero. We can't get at them. Only the logic of the marketplace will get at them. And I believe President Poole is right that special institutional investors want to stay in the market. And if so--if they either take profits or just rotate out of the tech stocks--they are going to go into the value stocks because that's where there is to go.
Thank you, Henry. You all will receive a copy of the memorandum and at the next meeting we'll have an opportunity to consider this. I hope, because the next meeting is the meeting for setting ranges, that we will use the interim time [to look carefully at] the memo so that we'll be prepared to respond to this. I think the proposals are reasonable. It doesn't make sense [currently].
 be at record levels and that retailers that source from Asia are doing especially well. They are not as optimistic about 1999 but extremely optimistic about the way this year will finish. In contrast to what somebody else said, sales of home furnishings have been very strong, probably reflecting the housing industry. Telecommunications also are very strong.
 [Laughter] As a prominent member of our business community said to me not too long ago, it's not the weather, it's the climate. [Laughter] Since our last meeting, I've become more comfortable with the idea that substantially weaker-than-forecast growth is less probable--partly because we're now a little further down the road without any signs that the worst-case scenarios are materializing and partly because my directors and my business contacts seem more positive about the economic outlook. Specifically, as I listened to some of my business contacts in construction, retail, and even real estate, the expectations that things will get substantially worse just aren't there. Also, the demand for labor seems to be growing at a moderate pace. On the price side, my contacts are not indicating much of an impetus for higher final goods prices.
 On the national inflation outlook, I understand the arguments given today for why inflation should continue to ease off. For that to occur, it is critical in my view that we continue to move policy out of its current accommodative stance. If we don't, I think we are stimulating demand--I think it's reflected in some of the other comments here and in some of the anecdotes that I've pointed out--and I think we will have future upward adjustments in inflation as we move forward. So I think it is critical that we get ourselves closer to that neutral zone that we talk about, which no one can pinpoint with certainty but which is probably somewhere between 31/2 and 41/2 percent. I'll leave it at that.
 A monopolist has a choice of controlling either price or quantity but he can never control both. I believe we've been trying to control the quantity of money by setting the price and we have misjudged. We've jiggled the price, in terms of the federal funds rate, one way or the other, and we've usually met with less than complete success in judging what quantity of money will be forthcoming from that. So, I think this gives us a much closer handle on the aggregates than we would have under any of these other approaches, although conceptually we certainly could do it by the old method if we had a wide enough band on the federal funds rate. But I don't think we would know what federal funds rate we would have to choose in order to get the desired rate of growth in the aggregates.
 I support your recommendation both in terms of alternative B and a symmetric directive. I do so principally because I believe there is more than enough uncertainty to go around. We do not know how severe the Asian problem is going to be. We do not know how far it is going to spread. We really do not know what it means for the United States in terms of quantifying it.
 But we have been continually wrong in that area, so I must say I am a bit humble in that regard. Overall, both the Greenbook and our own forecast describe an economic picture that may be the best of all possible outcomes: a relatively smooth slowdown in the expansion with very few downside risks, on the domestic front anyway. The question is whether this outcome will actually occur. Others have spoken about risks and I, too, think that there are large risks. And they occur on both sides.
 slow in their domestic markets, but this slowdown could be offset by continuing increases in exports. Similar to the Board staff, we estimate that the auto sector will contribute about 1/2 percentage point to real GDP growth in the current quarter, despite the fact that the auto industry is still struggling to address several model changeover and parts shortage problems. We also expect about the same contribution to real GDP growth in the first quarter of 1995. Indicators of consumer activity in the District are quite robust.
 We put some stock in this variant as well, in part because we have been impressed by a number of the other relatively encouraging indicators of demand in the third quarter, including the rebound in motor vehicle sales, the strength in orders and shipments of capital goods, and the relatively upbeat anecdotal information that we continue to receive from the ISM and other business surveys, from the Beige Book, and from our own business contacts. In addition, we continue to view the fundamental determinants of growth, especially the stance of monetary policy--and, in the near term, the stance of fiscal policy--as consistent with above-trend growth. On the other hand, we are operating in an environment of considerable uncertainty, and a key possibility that we must entertain is that something more fundamental is going on than just a temporary blip--something we don't understand and that may persist. Hypothesis #2: Maybe it's energy prices. Since June, the spot price of West Texas intermediate has increased about $6 per barrel.
 And after one quarter we get three-fourths of the response. That's much faster than we had when we started estimating these things. That means that if we have done a little here, we will begin to get some movement shortly thereafter. I don't think this is too inconsistent with the kind of behavior we have had this year, but we are working on [an analysis of] it. But our latest view is that the lags are a lot shorter than they used to be.
 Japan's GDP for the second half is rising at a 1.9 percent annual rate. I understand that there will be a big change in their fiscal policy, but it strikes me that a realistic forecast might be to go more to the pessimistic Asia scenario than to look for this rapid bounce back.
 And I think this is a good time to pay attention to those forward-looking indicators. On the financial fragility, I think lower rates would not help the credit rationing. What will help the credit rationing is when confidence begins to grow again about the economy and the risk of recession fades into the background. I'd also put more emphasis on the international side. To lower rates now would be counterproductive in terms of international flows and I think it would be counterproductive in terms of long-term rates.
 Rates do need to rise, but it's impossible to prejudge the appropriate path when we don't have a good understanding of the important dynamic forces at work. Tightening today is called for. I agree with most of my colleagues that it will bring the real funds rate into positive territory. It will mean that the increase in rates is larger than the increase in underlying inflation over the last year. Tightening today is built into the yield curve; on that yield curve intermediate- and long-term rates remain very low and consistent with very supportive financial conditions.
 In section 2, the factors supporting growth are made a little more explicit, including some of the things that you've spoken about today--favorable financial conditions and the recent mixed indicators. As for section 3, the CPI release was a touch to the high side of expectations, and the medical services component of the PPI even more so. This situation makes it likely that the core PCE price index will be disappointing and argues for substituting material similar to the bracketed material in the Bluebook. As for the risk assessment, this draft continues to characterize inflation as the Committee's "principal" concern, although some of you would prefer to identify it as your "predominant" concern, partly because of the precedential use of that word in the Chairman's monetary policy testimony. I hope for your sake that your hotel rooms have both a Gideons Bible and an unabridged dictionary.
 to be more "data dependent" going forward. I prefer that we say that we are going to be more "outlook dependent" or "forecast dependent" so that we do not look as though we are going to be a little too volatile in responding to near-term changes in the data. I am broadly comfortable with the language in B, and I think we should obviously move 25 basis points today.
 still permit foreign central banks, even the Ministry of Finance in all likelihood, if they wish to submit a competitive bid through us. We will accept it, but they will have to choose the rate. We will not give advice on rates or take part in that process. But it is a fact of life that the Treasury is now trying to find a way to work down its cash balances and the amount they issue at each auction without ending up with an uncertain and higher amount of cash than desired. It is a real mechanical problem.
 We have the continuing impact of recent rate cuts, and M2 growth is quite strong. I think those portend a stronger economy and some future upside risks for the economy. Obviously, though, capacity has increased in the economy and that will help restrain some of the price increases. We also have the external sector exerting deflationary pressures and we see many uncertainties with situations like Brazil. So balancing out those two effects, I would say that growth will come back toward trend but that the upside risks are noticeable.
Well, in our forecasts, we have continued high governmental borrowing in the second half of the year. This quarter, as you know, is the quarter in which the Treasury is not expected to raise any additional funds, or in fact may be a net repayer of debt. But it will raise substantial funds in the third and fourth quarters. Secondly, we do have both private business credit demands and household credit demands rising in line with projections of our GNP. Third, the assumption in the Greenbook of the sustained 5-1/2 percent M1 growth--we assume that there will be strong underlying demands for cash given nominal rates of GNP growth in the double digit range.
 overwhelm your policy tools. The most effective use of the limited scope for policy easing is to be preemptive and stop weaknesses from building. I think a 50 basis point easing will have beneficial effects. I don't think that the markets will react very much. We won't see those beneficial effects.
 rise over time. The growth risk relates to the possibility that future above-trend growth will raise utilization rates still further, thereby aggravating the risk of higher inflation. Given the uncertainty about how to judge utilization rates, we have tempered our inclination to be forward-looking in our policy actions and have given added weight to recent data on inflation and labor costs. There is, nevertheless, a causal chain that I believe we have been relying on--from growth relative to trend, to utilization rates, to wage changes, and finally to inflation.
 Our sense is that there probably is still some element of pent-up demand in the motor vehicles sector, just looking at what has happened to the stock of cars relative to the number of households and the aging in the stock and so on. Our forecast for next year, at just a little over 15 million for light vehicle sales, is certainly not high by the standards that we see in private forecasts and certainly not relative to the hopes of the automobile industry. I think they will have the capacity to supply that many cars and this is not an extraordinarily high level of durables expenditure overall relative to income or GDP. In fact, it's rather moderate in that sense. So I think there is a reasonable rationale for this path.
 The pace of economic activity remains quite strong on almost all fronts and inflationary pressures are now more obvious. Consumer spending not only continues to be strong but, given high levels of confidence, consumers appear poised to continue to spend at a good pace. Investment spending bounced back markedly in the first quarter; and though it will surely settle back to some less dramatic rate of growth, the signs point to considerable strength. The generally positive picture among our trading partners suggests growing demand from the foreign sector. And the apparently even stronger-than-thought federal tax revenues would seem to encourage higher federal spending.
 In that regard my judgment is that the expected value of inflation is in the area of its current level as far out as I can see. I also think that if we wanted to retain the "considerable period" language, we would be able to do that for a significant period of time. Indeed, I would guess that the most likely forecast of when we will have to move is not too far from when the futures market is currently anticipating that move will occur. We need to remember that we are talking very largely about a move in a tightening direction. There is a small probability that we might have to move rates lower should we suddenly run into some deflationary problems.
 We do not have the same policy that we had at the last meeting because the real rate of interest by our best estimate has fallen to even more sharply negative territory. We clearly see in the price of gold that people are making bets out there. And we continue to lock in to a fed funds rate that will only aggravate that kind of speculation and it only detracts from the role of the U.S. currency as the stable currency for the world.
 And, unfortunately, what you're suggesting enlarges the spread instead of narrowing it. We did narrow it before; we enlarged it last time by raising the upper end, and now we're going to lower the lower end, which enlarges the spread again. Well, this long diatribe will come to a halt. I am willing to accept the M2, M3 change. I would have been willing to accept a standstill because I don't think it is absolutely necessary for us to move every time.
 So, we were preemptive in the sense of being anti unemployment and preserving growth. When we turn to our future prospects, if we state our objective as minimizing the risk that the year 2000 will turn out to be a recession year, I think we would argue that it is necessary but not sufficient to prevent more inflation from emerging in 1998 and 1999. If we are successful in doing that, employment is going to be higher and output and standards of living are going to be higher when we get to the year 2000. This is going to be a richer country. The frustration comes when we look at policy options for the near term, for the next year or two.
Then we will have looked good not to have disbursed it, anyway.
 By conventional standards I think the case to move now is somewhere between strong and compelling. But I also think that there are very strong indications that things have indeed changed. Maybe the better question--it is at least for me--is whether this change is temporary and whether it will turn around very soon. If it does go back toward a more conventional experience, will it look the same as it did historically? I would compare this to the recent history of M2 that we discussed earlier this morning.
Let me start off by making some comments about what I think is going on and what I sense are the issues that we all are concerned about. For analytical purposes and policy purposes I think it's probably well worthwhile separating, to the extent that one can, the physical aspects of the economy--more specifically, the income and product accounts analysis--against the balance sheets of the financial system. If you look strictly at the movement of income, consumption, inventories, investment and the like, it is very easy to make the case that we may in fact already have seen the weakest point in [activity].
 Consumer prices in the Boston area were on the rise prior to Katrina, with the region's headline rate of inflation at 4 percent and core at 3 percent. The biggest area of price growth even then was for fuel and utilities, which rose almost twice as fast as nationwide over the 12 months from July '04 to July '05. Given the region's lack of homegrown energy supplies, its reliance on oil for home heating purposes, and the fact that over half of its electrical generators are now fired by natural gas brought in from outside the region, it seems clear that Boston price growth, driven by energy costs, will continue to outstrip the nation at least through the winter months. Moreover, a pre-Katrina Federal Energy Regulatory Commission report, which I think I've talked about before, sees the region's power supply at risk of widespread brownouts this winter if very cold weather puts stress on generators working at capacity. More broadly, contacts also reported that Katrina's impact on energy costs may give them cover for price increases that prior to Katrina they've lacked the power to make stick.
 And if indeed short-run performance is much better than many anticipate, that could give us a much stronger picture as we go on. So I don't disagree with that. I think it's just a matter of our reading of the available information and expected relationships, which suggests to us that things will be weaker. But they may well turn out to be stronger. My own view is that the odds are very low on that.
 But it's not at zero yet. So there is still some leeway to bring it down a bit further. But frankly, and this is the main point I would make--it echoes comments that a number of other people have made--I really doubt that additional interest rate cuts at this point are going to do a lot to deal with the critical weakness in equipment investment. What I'm hearing frequently from members of our boards and other business contacts is that a rebound in investment spending is unlikely to occur until investing businesses have some sense that the economy is at a bottom or very, very close to a bottom. So I think the direct stimulative effect of low real short rates on the economy overall may not be very substantial at this point, which might tempt us to move rates even lower.
 And the interest rate on mortgages? Yes, what Mr. Partee has said may well turn out to be right, but I don't think people are going to be deterred by an increase in mortgage interest rates of one half of one percent or even a full one percent. And the money will be available at a somewhat higher interest rate. So, I believe that this will continue.
 We are now receiving more reports of rising wage pressures, especially for low skill entry-level jobs. But these increases do not yet appear in the data, as a third-quarter employment cost index for the Midwest was roughly in line with the nation. We have received an advanced copy of Manpower Incorporated's first-quarter 1996 hiring plans survey results, which will not be publicly available until early December. The national results indicate that business hiring plans for the first quarter of 1996 will remain at the high levels reported for both the third quarter and the fourth quarter of this year. Hiring plans for Midwest firms continue to be stronger than the national survey results.
Yes it did, but the net, I believe, Paul, was a major stockpile. Furthermore, I think the deterioration of the dollar is going to add a significant inflation stimulus over the next few months. I hope you are right that we'll get a reduction, or a correction, in these various elements you've mentioned to stop the deterioration, but I have my doubts about it over the short-run period. On balance, what I'm saying is that I think we are going to be facing a fairly significant inflationary run-up in the early part of next year, culminating, perhaps, in the summer of the year.
 I continue to believe that what comes the closest to capturing the central tendency is leaving the 4 to 7 percent. We could raise M2 and M3--at least the upper ends--by a 1/2 point, if that makes people feel happier. We would make some note that growth is going to be running above the cone. I don't think we have to say that in the directive; I could say in the testimony that we're running ahead of the cone in the early part of the year and we expect that. I think that's normal and reasonable under all conditions.
 When OPEC increases its prices, it does so without an increase in supply. In the case of decontrol there's at least a hope that it is going to have a supply-side effect. When one works that through the system, it's not clear whether in general--though clearly energy prices will go up--the inflation rate will go up.
" I think the rest of the wording has it right. On "predominant" versus "principal," let me give just the following argument. I don't believe that a plain language reading of the two words justifies the conclusion that "principal" will be read as softer than "predominant." People disagree, and in answering the question about what we expect to achieve by changing "predominant" to "principal," I'm not sure we'd win the basic argument that people would say, "Yeah, it's softer." So, on the argument of consistency, I would stay with "predominant.
The vote will encompass the directive I'll read from the Bluebook and the statement for alternative A in the chart that you have in front of you. "The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 21/4 percent.
I don't know what the timeframe will be. It might take a couple of months before we get all the corrections and are able to incorporate them into the lightly edited transcript. By the time we send the draft transcripts to you, you send them directly back to us, and we incorporate corrections, there may be a meeting that goes by.
 Chairman, I'm very strongly in the camp with Governor Angell. We have made a decision here and it becomes at that point a simple question of integrity. With this auction going on, we now know what has been done and what will be done and it is only a matter of straightforward integrity that we have to go on and do it and release that information. If we did not make this effective right away, in time, as the minutes come out, the fact that it was decided upon and then delayed would be known to the market and I think we would quite correctly suffer an integrity question and a credibility gap that we would deserve to suffer. And that would be there for a long time.
Well, this question will arise. Some work also is being done on proposals that we came up with at the time of that [unintelligible] and rejected for the time being--whether to require a reserve against the aggregation of all this if it's too big.
 Before concluding, let me note that the staff recommends approval of a $15 billion foreign exchange swap line with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand to help satisfy the dollar funding needs of banks that operate in New Zealand. As noted in the memo to the Committee from Nathan Sheets and myself that was distributed on Friday, this would complement the swap agreements that we have already enacted with other advanced economies and would have the same technical features as those with the smaller advanced countries (that is, Australia, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden) with fixed swap line limits. Nathan will be discussing the potential for additional swap line authorizations for four emerging market countries recommended by the staff that were discussed in a second memo to the Committee on Friday. There were no foreign operations during this period. I request a vote to ratify the operations of the System Open Market Account that have been undertaken since the September 16 FOMC meeting.
 I think we would be better served not to have this last sentence, line 8, in the statement. We could convey this message in speeches, as you already have in some ways, over the coming period. The data coming out will decide a lot of this for us and move us toward a June time frame anyway. But I think the more important element of today's decision is that we cannot move now and we should be thinking about June. In that sense, I support your recommendation.
I can accept your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Although I think there is some chance that this action may be unnecessary, I doubt it will be harmful. Let me just reiterate my own uncertainty about what the appropriate model is in this environment. It seems to me that many of the conventional models that we've been looking at over the last several years have simply been wrong on the critical issue of the acceleration of inflation.
 And if it came out in the 8 or 9 percent area, it would seem to allow enough for this forecast, if nothing else went wrong. Given all the uncertainties in M1, and given the doubts in the economy, I would not feel comfortable about tightening up in effect to chase too hard at an April M1 figure if M2 is also running low. I don't know whether that's going to be the case; I have no reason to believe that it will be the case, but I would feel very uncomfortable about "tightening," in the common parlance, with a low M2 figure at the same time. So, I come out close to the A alternative so far as M2 is concerned. Let's say around 8 percent.
 First and foremost, of course, is the energy sector with a contraction that I believe has been more severe than we had expected earlier. And the weakness has spread beyond the energy sector itself and is reaching into state governments. For example, in Louisiana I heard a report that the state government is cutting back severely in the university system; programs are being cut and I think that will continue in other parts of the state as well. The lumber industry also has been badly hit. Commercial construction is a concern.
 It is the inflationary psychology or whatever. So I don't think of this as a program specifically directed to the foreign side. If anything, it's specifically directed toward the domestic side, but it will have foreign repercussions. One oE the interesting questions--it's very hard to express and I don't k n o w the answer--is whether the new approach will carry a message of its own even in the international markets. I would be a little more optimistic [on that score] than some of the comments I just heard.
But again, what you're doing is assuming that the June figure is a solid one and that it signals the first of a series of downward shifts in money demand, which is built into these specifications in the first place. If that doesn't continue, unless we have some sort of understanding that we're going to operate on money market conditions, interest rates will begin to ratchet up. And that's something that I just don't think we ought to do. One way to get around this might be to go to a May base.
Well, we have had a variety of opinions expressed. But I detect, with some prejudice, a willingness to live with last month's directive, though with some concern about how it's going to be implemented. I don't find entirely answerable those questions because [they require] too many assumptions about what is going on. In the immediate sense, [an unchanged directive] doesn't imply anything but staying on the path that we're now on. That involves borrowings of around $1.
 Well, the fact that nothing happened is important. To basically say that the economy is going to be dull for the next several months and that the federal funds rate is not likely to change is a profoundly important statement if you believe it. To say something is not going to change involves as much risk as saying that it will change because our ability to look out there and make that judgment is limited. You may consider your data to indicate a poor correlation. I think the fact that the quadrants are correct is essentially communicating some information to the market that it did not have previously.
 With regard to housing starts, which have been revised downward somewhat, we think that [projection is] reasonable. There is a development that apparently is prevalent in our area at least that involves the construction people, and that is that there is more residential construction going on now under contract as opposed to speculative construction. If they=re under contract, [home building] will continue on through perhaps a good part of this year at a fairly high level. A second aspect of that seems to be the consensus that rates will not be a constraining factor in this inflationary period--on residential construction at least. Most people perceive the fact that if they invest today in residential construction, it will be the best investment they will have made and, therefore, what they pay for the money to build a new home or to get into another home is not much of a constraining factor.
 The Sixth District was home to some of the strongest growth in services employment in the nation during the 1990s. In particular, almost 40 percent of Florida's 7 million plus workforce are employed in the provision of nonfinancial, nonretail services; the state has about 50 percent more people employed in hotels and related activities than the national average. As a result, the slowdown in tourism has hit service-related jobs hard and will continue to do so for some time in the future. We have continued to press our regional contacts for insights into when we might expect to see some recovery in investment spending. While excess capacity in most industries certainly will discourage spending to add capacity, there are now some signs of renewed spending on technology.
 Second, I agree with Bob Black that the Iranian situation, the Cambodian situation, and others portend shocks that are outside the energy area but could be quite significant as we look down the road. So I'm really uncertain as to what the outlook may be. Another shock we face is the fact that we are going to change the [definitions of the] aggregates and that's going to introduce another uncertainty into the picture. In view of that, I would be inclined to go with alternative C on the aggregates measures because of the phase-in or transitional stage. I'd stay with the present federal funds range, as in alternative B, and keep the $1-1/2 billion in borrowing.
 Therefore, what I would propose, within the context of a monetary aggregates directive, is that we take a range for M1 that cuts just a little bit from alternative C on the downside. I would say 4 to 9 percent. I don't want to go as far as some have suggested because it does look as if April is going to be a large month and it is not reasonable to have something that is just totally outside the [figures] that are possible. And I would take 5-1/2 to 9-1/2, a 4-point range for M2, which I think is consistent with the M1 numbers that I gave and would mean about the same kind of deposit expansion as in alternative C. On the funds rate, I would say 6-3/4 to 7-1/2.
 This is also the view of market participants, whose expectations for policy have steepened considerably over the intermeeting period. My forecast, therefore, incorporates a monetary policy path that is steeper than the one in the Greenbook. I assume that the funds rate will reach 2.75 percent by the end of 2008 and move up to 4.5 percent by the end of 2009.
 As for other areas, consumer spending appears to be moving ahead, with nondurables, particularly apparel, continuing to sell quite well. Auto dealers are also showing some improvement. While the business contacts I have met with recently appear confident that growth will be sustained, they're very clearly disappointed with the pace of expansion and are looking for greater growth. At the same time, their comments don't indicate that a lack of liquidity or financing is a problem anymore. If anything, they're reporting improved cash flows from lower interest rates, and several have noted that banks have become increasingly aggressive in efforts to make loans.